+++
title = "PageRank?!"
date = "2020-11-08"
tags = ["Amundsen", "Neo4j", "Elasticsearch", "Recommender System"]
+++

Here is a quick update of what I have been working on... 

##### Amundsen

My current team has been working on an open source data discovery and metadata
engine, [Amundsen](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsen), which is hosted
by the [LF AI & Data Foundation](https://lfaidata.foundation/). Overall, it has
been a great experience using and contributing to the application. 

Being interested machine learning, the product claim of "a PageRank style
search based on usage patterns" sounds great. Taking it a step further, the
product [website](https://www.amundsen.io/) promises to enable users to
discover trusted data with the following text:

> Search for data within your organization by a simple text search. A
> PageRank-inspired search algorithm recommends results based on names,
> descriptions, tags, and querying/viewing activity on the table/dashboard.

Again, sounds great! I thought it would be interesting to see how they
implemented their PageRank style algorithm given a graph with multiple node and
edge types. After diving in, the product claims seem to be more marketing than
reality. In both the search and metadata services, a PageRank style algorithm
seems yet to be implemented. To be fair, the user experience does not seem to
suffer, but there is definitely room for improvement.

In the metadata service [code](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenmetadatalibrary/blob/v2.5.4/metadata_service/proxy/neo4j_proxy.py#L706),
the linked comment describes the popularity score used to rank tables according
to their usage patterns:

> `popularity score = number of distinct readers + log(total number of reads)`

This might be a valid heuristic or a minimal implementation of collaborative
filtering, but this is definitely not
[PageRank](https://neo4j.com/docs/graph-data-science/current/algorithms/page-rank/)
and probably does not qualify as "PageRank style". As a heuristic, the code
author mentions that the scoring function applies a logarithm on the total
number of reads so that score will not be affected by small number of users
repeatedly reading the same table. The search service
[code](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsensearchlibrary/blob/v2.3.3/search_service/proxy/elasticsearch.py#L130)
follows a similar heuristic which is implemented using a 
[function field value factor](https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/current/query-dsl-function-score-query.html#function-field-value-factor)
in Elasticsearch. Overall, the heuristic seems reasonable. Viewed as a minimal
implementation of collaborative filtering, user behavior is being used as a
feature in the recommender system, but again, there is definitely room for
improvement. 

##### Where to go next?!

I plan on focusing on a few key improvements:

1. *Identify a performance metric for the recommender system* - A measure of
   performance will enable the tracking of recommender system improvements;
   a metric such as click-through rate is an easy choice, but the Amundsen
   user feedback capability could also be used to measure success.

2. *Enable user customization* - The ability to pass user information to the
   recommender system will allow for customized recommendations on a per-user
   basis ideally improving user experience. 

3. *Improve upon collaborative filtering* - The ability to incorporate
   additional features into the collaborative filtering algorithm should
   improve performance.

4. *Incorporate content-based filtering* - A hybrid approach of both
   collaborative and content-based filtering, using data asset features in
   addition to user behavior features, should further improve performance.

5. *Extend the recommender system to new data assets* - Enabling the recommender
   system to recommend other data assets, e.g. users and dashboards, will
   improve the overall user experience. 

I hope to post updates on my progress over the coming weeks. 

##### Unfortunate naming

Unfortunately Amundsen is named after
[Roald Amundsen](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roald_Amundsen) who is credited
with the first expedition to the South Pole and also the approach "... to kill
some of his dogs on the way and use them as a source for fresh meat". In
another story of unfortunate naming, I've learned that IID also stands for 
ignition interlock device, which is a DUI prevention tool. SEO is going to be
fun.
