+++
title = "Amundsen user personalization"
date = "2020-11-13"
tags = ["Amundsen", "Neo4j", "Elasticsearch", "Recommender System"]
+++

Following up on my last post about Amundsen's not so PageRank inspired
heuristic, the hypothesis is that personalized data discovery will lead to a
better user experience. Personalization can take two forms, popular tables and
search results. Here we will focus on popular tables.

The first step of personalizing popular tables is going to be passing the
authenticated user context to the appropriate place in the codebase. From the 
[architecture](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsen/blob/master/docs/architecture.md#architecture)
diagram, we know that the two services that are in scope of the change are
going to be the frontend and the metadata service. Given that the authenticated
user is going to be specified in the frontend, let's start there. 

##### Frontend service

Starting with the frontend service, the 
[`popular_tables`](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenfrontendlibrary/blob/v2.3.0/amundsen_application/api/metadata/v0.py#L49-L81)
function can invoke the 
[`get_access_headers`](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenfrontendlibrary/blob/e54fb8f71e88efb89156b6c6ffbc609d31b08858/amundsen_application/oidc_config.py#L10-L22)
method when frontend authentication is enabled. This configuration is accessed
with `app.config['REQUEST_HEADERS_METHOD'](app)`. The code below will attempt
to take the user ID from the headers if possible and then format the request
to the metadata service. 

{{< gist joshthoward 357723e5e8ca2b71e2f1b32d557366a3 amundsen_application.api.metadata.v0.py >}}

##### Metadata service

The metadata service endpoint for popular tables is configured in the base
[metadata_service](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenmetadatalibrary/blob/master/metadata_service/__init__.py)
module. Adding the line below enables an optional variable section for the
route for user ID. Note that the old endpoint is kept for backwards
compatibility.

{{< gist joshthoward 357723e5e8ca2b71e2f1b32d557366a3 metadata_service.__init__.py >}}

The `GET` method for the popular tables endpoint is implemented in the
[`popular_tables`](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenmetadatalibrary/blob/v2.5.4/metadata_service/api/popular_tables.py#L19-L24)
module. To take advantage of the variable section of the route, an optional
user ID parameter should be added. 

{{< gist joshthoward 357723e5e8ca2b71e2f1b32d557366a3 metadata_service.api.popular_tables.py >}}

A key thing to note is that the class uses a proxy client for a backend
database; several backend databases are possible. Given that the Neo4j is the
default backend database, the `neo4j_proxy` module is shown in this post. The 
[`get_popular_tables`](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenmetadatalibrary/blob/5f1d0568e9aa646a44a27b7e948a94c17f14d747/metadata_service/proxy/neo4j_proxy.py#L731-L765)
needs to be updated to take an optional user ID as a parameter. The
[_get_popular_tables_uris](https://github.com/amundsen-io/amundsenmetadatalibrary/blob/5f1d0568e9aa646a44a27b7e948a94c17f14d747/metadata_service/proxy/neo4j_proxy.py#L704-L729)
method is where the Neo4j query is actually executed. The updates are shown below. 

{{< gist joshthoward 357723e5e8ca2b71e2f1b32d557366a3 metadata_service.proxy.neo4j_proxy.py >}}

Overall, getting the authenticated user context to the right method was pretty
painless. The next step will be to implement some algorithms. 
