+++
title = "MNIST Two Ways"
date = "2019-11-23"
tags = ["PyTorch", "Keras"]
+++

I have recently been interested in switching from the Keras and TensorFlow deep
learning frameworks to the PyTorch framework. Rather than making a thorough and
passionate internet argument on why I believe that PyTorch is the better
choice, I think a comparison between implementations of a simple neural network
(MNIST) says enough about the decision to switch.

For the sake of comparison, I initially wanted to implement MNIST in both
TensorFlow and PyTorch. But given the strong [recommendation](https://www.tensorflow.org/guide/effective_tf2#use_keras_layers_and_models_to_manage_variables)
from TensorFlow community to use Keras layers to define a model, it doesn't
make much sense to use TensorFlow instead of Keras with the TensorFlow backend.
For this reason I used the Keras MNIST
[reference implementation](https://keras.io/examples/mnist_cnn) to compare
against PyTorch.

I have closely replicate the Keras MNIST reference implementation in PyTorch
given that there is no official reference implementation for MNIST currently
provided by the PyTorch community. Both implementations make use of the
sequential APIs, which are very similar between frameworks, and the same
hyperparameters for model training. The implementations and a comparison
between the two can be found below:

##### Keras Implementation

{{< gist joshthoward 41f353bb669caf9caef51c7adfbff962 keras_mnist.py >}}

##### PyTorch Implementation

{{< gist joshthoward 41f353bb669caf9caef51c7adfbff962 pytorch_mnist.py >}}

##### Comparison

The most important thing to note is that the two implementations are relatively
similar in terms of lines of code. Keeping in mind that Keras is 
[described](https://keras.io/) as a "high-level neural networks API", the fact
that the API is "high-level" does not equate to fewer lines of code. What
"high-level" does equate to is abstracting away the complexity of model
training.

While this is not inherently wrong, in might not be effective for more complex
models. What is inherently wrong is that for all the Keras abstraction that
Keras provides around model training the code is not more concise or readable.
So while Keras might be helpful to get a simple example like MNIST up and
running without understanding the details of model training, I do not believe
that there is any benefit to using Keras for a practitioner who knows what they
are doing. 
